Move documentation to doc/ folder and fill some gaps in the documentation (#1154)
mono/linker: docs/illink-options.md

# IL Linker Command Line Options

> ## illink tool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `illink` tool
```

> The illink is IL Linker version shipping with .NET Core or .NET 5.0 platforms. It's bundled with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `illink` is IL Linker version shipping with .NET Core or .NET 5 platforms. It's bundled with
```

> The illink is IL Linker version shipping with .NET Core or .NET 5.0 platforms. It's bundled with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`illink` is the IL Linker version shipping with .NET Core or .NET 5.0 platforms. It's bundled with
```

the .NET SDK and most of the options are accessible using msbuild properties but any option

> can also be passed using `ExtraArgs` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can also be passed using `_ExtraTrimmerArgs` property.
```

### Linking from the main assembly

The command:

`illink -a Program.exe`

> will use the assembly Program.exe as a source. That means that the linker will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will use the assembly `Program.exe` as a source. That means that the linker will
```

> walk through all the methods of Program.exe to generate only what is necessary
> for this assembly to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
start with the main entry point method of `Program.exe` (typically the `Main` method) and process all its dependencies to determine what is necessary for this assembly to run.
```

### Linking from an [XML descriptor](data-formats.md#descriptor-format)

The command:

`illink -x desc.xml`

will use the XML descriptor as a source. That means that the linker will
use this file to decide what to link in a set of assemblies. The format of the

> descriptors is described further on in this document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
descriptors is described in [data-formats document](../data-formats.md).
```

Please make sure that the link actually works - I don't know if relative paths like this are supported by GitHub.

### Actions on the assemblies

You can specify what the linker should do exactly per assembly.

The linker can do the following things on all or individual assemblies

- `skip` - skip them, and do nothing with them
- `copy` - copy them to the output directory
- `copyused` - copy used assemblies to the output directory
- `link` - link them to reduce their size
- `delete`- remove them from the output
- `save` - save them in memory without linking

> - `AddBypassNGen` - add BypassNGenAttribute to unmarked methods

Reviewer 2: IIRC you had some concerns about the `AddBypassNGen` attribute implementation - should we remove the documentation for them?

Author: Yeah they are a bit weird (removed them for now)

- `AddBypassNgenUsed` - add BypassNGenAttribute to unmarked methods in used assemblies

You can specify an action per assembly using `-p` option like this:

`illink -p link Foo`

or

`illink -p skip System.Windows.Forms`

Or you can specify what to do for the core assemblies.

Core assemblies are the assemblies that belong to the base class library,

> like mscorlib.dll, System.dll or System.Windows.Forms.dll.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
like `System.Private.CoreLib.dll`, `System.dll` or `System.Windows.Forms.dll`.
```

You can specify what action to do on the core assemblies with the option:

`-c skip|copy|link`

### The output directory

By default, the linker will create an `output` directory in the current
directory where it will store the processed files, to avoid overwritting input
assemblies. You can change the output directory with the option:

`-out PATH`

> If you specify the ouput directory `.', please ensure that you won't write over

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you specify the ouput directory `.`, please ensure that you won't write over
```

> If you specify the ouput directory `.', please ensure that you won't write over

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you specify the ouput directory `.`, please ensure that you won't write over
```

important assemblies of yours.

> ### Specifying assemblies look up paths

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Specifying assembly lookup paths
```

By default, the linker will first look for assemblies in the directories `.`
and `bin`. You can specify additional locations where assemblies will be searched
for by using `-d PATH` option.

Example:

`illink -d ../../libs -a program.exe`

### Excluding framework features

> One of the ways how to reduce core assemblies size is by removing framework capabilities. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the ways to reduce core assembly sizes is by removing framework capabilities. This
```

is usually something that the developer decides about as it alters the program behaviour
therefore the decision whether the size saving is worth it is left to the developer.

> Each feature can be controlled independly using `--feature NAME value` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each feature can be controlled independently using `--feature NAME value` option.
```

> The list of available features names is the framework dependant and can be different for different

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The list of available feature names is framework-dependent and can be different for different
```

> The list of available features names is the framework dependant and can be different for different
> versions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list of available features names is framework dependent and can vary between different framework
versions. 
```

> The list of controllable features for .NET Core is available at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/run-time-config/.

Reviewer: We don't really have a list - that list is for the `runtimeconfig.json` not all options there are feature switches either. But I guess it's the best we have right now.

Author: Yeah, I was looking for it and this is the closest I found. We should document it somewhere though, would you mind filling doc issue?

> The list of controllable features for .NET Core is available at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/run-time-config/.

Reviewer 2: This isn't true currently, and it won't be unless we have one link-time setting per runtimeconfig setting. I'd suggest leaving this out and we can establish a new doc page describing those with linker support.

> `ILLink.Substitutions.xml`

Reviewer: Not sure what this is about - should it be removed?

Author: Removed

### Using custom [substitutions](data-formats.md#substitution-format)

An option called `--substitutions FILE` allows external customization of any

> method or field for assemblies which are linked. The syntax used for that is based on
> XML files. Using substitutions with `ipconstprop` optimization (enabled by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
method or field for assemblies which are linked. The syntax used is described in [data-formats document](../data-formats.md). Using substitutions with `ipconstprop` optimization (enabled by
```

default) can help reduce output size as any dependencies under conditional
logic which will be evaluated as unreachable will be removed.

### Adding custom linker steps

You can write [custom steps](/doc/custom-steps.md) for the linker and instruct
the linker to add them into its existing pipeline. To tell the linker where this assembly is
located, you have to append its full path after a comma which separates the custom
 step's name from the custom assembly's path

`--custom-step [custom step],[custom assembly]`

You can now ask the linker to add the custom step at the end of the pipeline:

`illink --custom-step Foo.FooStep,D:\Bar\Foo.dll`

Or you can ask the linker to add it after a specific step:

`illink --custom-step +MarkStep:Foo.FooStep,D:\Bar\Foo.dll -a program.exe`

Or before a specific step:

`illink --custom-step -MarkStep:Foo.FooStep,D:\Bar\Foo.dll -a program.exe`

### Passing data to custom steps

> For advanced custom steps which needs interaction with external values there is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For advanced custom steps which need interaction with external values there is a
```

`--custom-data KEY=VALUE` option. Each key can have a simple value assigned which means

> if you need to store multiple values for the same key use custom separator for the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if you need to store multiple values for the same key, you should use custom separators for the
```

values and pass them as one key-value pair.

### Supplementary [custom attributes](data-formats.md#custom-attributes-annotations-format)

> Much of the linker behaviour is controled by the custom attributes but they are not always

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Much of the linker behaviour is controlled by the custom attributes but they are not always
```

present in the input assemblies. The attributes can be applied to any existing metadata using
`--attribute-defs FILE` option.

### Ignoring embedded XML control files

> The linker recognizes embedded XML resources based on name as special one which can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The linker recognizes embedded XML resources based on name as special ones which can
```

> alter the linking behaviour. The behaviour can be suppressed with if necessary by using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
alter the linking behaviour. The behaviour can be suppressed if necessary by using
```

> alter the linking behaviour. The behaviour can be suppressed with if necessary by using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
alter the linking behaviour. The behaviour can be suppressed if necessary by using
```
